A brain dump of improvements for the problems described in
notes/subtree-mergeinfo/the-performance-problem.txt.

I) Encourage best practices that reduce the amount of subtree mergeinfo.

  a) Merge only to the roots of branches.

  b) Don't merge to targets with switched subtrees.

  c) Don't do shallow merges (i.e. depths other than infinity).

  d) Don't setup tree structure so the mergers aren't authorized to subtrees
     in the merge source or target.
  
II) Functional changes to reduce/eliminate the amount of subtree mergeinfo.

  a) Stop creating empty mergeinfo during WC-to-WC copies and moves.
     Mentioning this only for historical reasons, this change was made
     in 1.5.5.
     
  b) Allow Ib), Ic), and/or Id) but simply don't set/create subtree
     mergeinfo describing the merge.  Make these practives 'use at own risk'.

  c) Restrict merge targets to the roots of branches only.  We'd need to
     clearly define what this means and a way of identifying the root
     (svn:is-root property?).
   
III) New svn_ra_get_location_segments2 API that accepts multiple paths.

  This should aleviate the 'Implicit Mergeinfo Query Problem' somewhat
  by allowing us to query the server one time for all the subtree's
  implicit mergeinfo.

IV) Cache natural history in the WC.

  Uncertain how much this buys us.  The problem is the network round-trip
  incurred when asking about subtree's natural history.  Caching the natural
  history would not reduce the number of roundtrips, rather it would restrict
  the revision range we pass to svn_ra_get_location_segments() in the feature
  branch case.  Is there a use case where this would actually reduce server
  queries?

V) Implement smart(er) elision.

    a) Client side: Something like 'svn elide TARGET' or
       'svn merge --elide TARGET'.
       
        ### TODO: Pseudo code for this.

    b) Server side: An svnadmin subcommand to do Va) server-side for the entire
       repos. 

VI) Mergeinfo2 property that stores only the diff between itself and
    it's nearest parent with explicit mergeinfo.

    ### TODO: Walk through the benefits here.
